The composer Pauline Oliveros, who passed away recently at the age of 84, stood out in her field for the energy she poured into progressive lines of musical inquiry and into support for her students and colleagues, as Geeta Dayal [documents](https://frieze.com/article/pauline-oliveros-1932-2016) in her wonderful obituary for *Frieze*. In all these pursuits, and in her [writing](http://query.nytimes.com/mem/archive/pdf?res=9E01EEDE143CE531A15750C1A96F9C946190D6CF), Oliveros' voice was harsh in its directness and uplifting in its clarity — the fruit of a rare commitment to distilling avant-garde ambitions into simple vessels. Her series of "sonic meditations" makes that effort particularly apparent. In these poetically honed written works, she addresses the reader with instructions that, when followed by a group, bring the musical piece into being and the participant listeners into a transformative state of awareness. I first learned about Oliveros when we enacted one of these pieces, *Teach Yourself to Fly*, in an intro computer music course.

> Teach Yourself To Fly
>
> *dedicated to Amelia Earhart*
>
> Any number of persons sit in a circle facing the center. Illuminate the space with dim blue light. Begin by simply observing your own breathing. Always be an observer. Gradually allow your breathing to become audible. Then gradually introduce your voice. Allow your vocal cords to vibrate in any mode which occurs naturally. Allow the intensity of the vibrations to increase very slowly. Continue as long as possible, naturally, and until all others are quiet, always observing your own breath cycle. Variation: translate voice to an instrument.

Both times I've taken part in *Teach Yourself to Fly*, I've felt the piece operating on me at a level untapped by any other musical experience. Nodes dedicated to breathing, vocalizing, listening, and social interrelation were all pulled up from the tangle of my brain, which slowly reorganized itself around them. I was floored that the piece achieved such a deep-reaching effect and such a complex sound structure through just a few carefully worded instructions. It was only later, when considering Oliveros' work alongside recent software-based projects in interactive music, that I saw her use of instructions as a revelatory turn for composition in the computer era. Oliveros sculpted these works from the same material as software, but

entrusted her process into the consciousness of her listeners.

In an essay titled "Software for People," Oliveros describes a turning point in her artistic trajectory: a refining of the sonic meditations practice toward the goal of training other musicians to modulate their attention between "global" and "focal" states. The title points out that her sonic meditation pieces are of the same stuff as computer code, and she refers in the essay to her piece as a "program" for the high school woodwind section performing it. More significantly, she notes that the "program allows for failures in the system to have a positive function."
She paved the way for artists to use instructions as a material addressed in tandem to listeners and to machines. Through her example, she made a convincing case for sound as the medium through which that

The care Oliveros devoted in her compositions was not toward their output — the audible result of a program's execution — but rather toward the transformation of the interpreter. As Kerry O'Brien [writes](http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/listening-as-activism-the-sonic-meditations-of-pauline-oliveros),
> In these works, experiments were not conducted on the music; the music was an experiment on the self. Anyone searching today for the complete box set of "Sonic Meditations" won't find it, because, as the composer wrote, "music is a welcome by-product" of this composition. The experiments remain in each listener.

One contemporary work that exhibits this principle particularly strongly is Reiko Yamada's *Reflective*. Yamada's interactive musical piece takes new form in each of its installations, with different layers of recorded sound and new settings for the listener inspired by the site, but its conception centers on her interest in ushering the listener into a state of reflection on choice and consequence.

The designation "Software for People" is a partial, playful
